   To print this manual, press F4, then press P.

	      █████🮘████████🮘 ▂▄▆ █████  🮙███████🮙▆▄▂
		🮂▀🮅🮘███🮅▀🮂   ████ 🮅▀🮂	  🮙█ 🮂▀🮅█🮙████
		    ███🮘     ████ ▆▄▂	  🮙█	 🮙████
		    ███🮘     ████ █████   🮙█	 🮙████
		    ███🮘     ████ 🮅▀🮂	  🮙█	 🮙████
		    ███🮘     ████ █▆▄▂	  🮙█ ▂▄▆█🮙████
		    ███🮘     🮂▀🮅█ █████  🮙███████🮙🮅▀🮂

		      TED version #2.6 manual

		  Copyright (C) 1991 M.S. BBS Jos-Tel
			    (C) M.J. Vriend
		    English translation (C) 2026

	CONTENTS					      Page

1.	Introduction.............................................  3

2.	The Jos-Tel Multiple Sclerosis fund-raiser...............  4
   2.1	  What is Multiple Sclerosis.............................  4
   2.2	  What happens with the proceeds of the Jos-Tel fund.....  5

3.	Installing TED...........................................  6
   3.1	  Preparing a working diskette...........................  6
   3.2	  Starting the program...................................  7

4.	Screen layout............................................  8
   4.1	  Status lines...........................................  8
   4.2	  Text lines.............................................  9

5.	Keyboard................................................. 10
   5.1	  Letter keys........................................... 10
   5.2	  Other keys............................................ 10

6.	Description of the function-key commands................. 14
   6.1	  Structure of the function keys........................ 14
   6.2	  Function keys 1 and 6: page up / page down............ 14
   6.3	  Function key 2: Settings.............................. 14
   6.4	  Function key 3: System................................ 23
   6.5	  Function key 4: Commands.............................. 30
   6.6	  Function key 5: Block functions....................... 32
   6.7	  Function key 7: Help menu............................. 32

7.	Control-key commands..................................... 33
   7.1	  How they work......................................... 33
   7.2	  Starting the TEDINS6 install program.................. 33
   7.3	  Showing the current settings.......................... 33
   7.4	  Setting key combinations.............................. 33
   7.5	  Saving the key combinations........................... 34
   7.6	  Leaving TEDINS6....................................... 34

8.	Step-by-step examples.................................... 35
   8.1	  Reflowing text into paragraphs........................ 35
   8.2	  Form letter with mail merge........................... 36
   8.3	  Lists................................................. 38
   8.4	  Text in columns....................................... 38
   8.5	  Pascal program........................................ 39
   8.6	  BASIC program......................................... 39
   8.7	  Assembler program..................................... 40

9.	The MemMan memory manager................................ 41
   9.1	  Installing MemMan..................................... 41

10.	The PB.TSR printer-buffer program........................ 42
  10.1	  Installing the printer buffer......................... 42
  10.2	  The PRINT.COM helper program.......................... 42


Appendix A - Quick reference of functions........................ 44
Appendix B - Changes since TED 2.5............................... 48

Ordering, information, etc....................................... 49


§ 1.  Introduction

TED is a full-featured word processor for MSX2 computers. TED is
particularly fast, easy to operate, and has a large memory
capacity.

TED can be used for, among other things:
   - letters
   - reports
   - manuals
   - personally addressed mailings
   - meeting minutes
   - programming in assembler, Pascal, C, BASIC, etc.

TED uses all available MSX2 memory, both Video RAM and the Memory
Mapper, and can also cooperate with a printer buffer and a
RAM disk. TED runs under both the MSX-DOS1 and MSX-DOS2 operating
systems.

The demonstration version of TED is called TEDDEMO.COM. This demo
is almost identical to TED 2.6; only the save and print functions
are removed. The evaluation program may be freely distributed.
You can buy a registered version of TED 2.6 from Jos-Tel for
ƒ 50,=. That price includes the diskette and shipping; the entire
profit (about ƒ 40,=) goes to the Dutch Multiple Sclerosis
Foundation. An accounting can be found in the Jos-Tel BBS.


§ 2.  The Jos-Tel Multiple Sclerosis fund-raiser

TED has been in development for three years and is still being
adapted and extended to user needs. TED is developed and sold in
the Netherlands by MS-BBS Jos-Tel. This BBS aims to raise money
for the Friends of Multiple Sclerosis Research Foundation by
selling various MSX and MS-DOS programs, including TED.


§ 2.1  What is Multiple Sclerosis

Anyone between the ages of 20 and 40 can fall victim to the
debilitating disease Multiple Sclerosis. Medical science is
helpless because there is hardly any money for research. Your
contribution helps put an end to the threat that MS poses to all
of us.

MS - a disease of the nervous system.
MS - leads to mild paralysis.
MS - whose cause is unknown so a cure is not possible.
MS - where you never know when the next attack will take away
     another piece of your energy.
MS - a quiet sorrow for the person who has it and for the partner
     who watches helplessly.


§ 2.2  What happens with the proceeds of the Jos-Tel fund-raiser

By making a donation in support of the Friends of M.S. Research
Foundation, you can download some very nice programs from
Jos-Tel.

The Friends of M.S. Research Foundation has set itself the goal
of funding research into the cause and treatment of Multiple
Sclerosis. The foundation uses its funds to support researchers,
caregivers, etc.

Every month I transfer your contributions to the giro account of
the MS Foundation. An accounting of this can be found in the
Jos-Tel BBS.

Thank you for purchasing this program,

					 with kind regards,

						   J.R. de Boer,
						   Sysop Jos-Tel


With our endorsement, signed,

   Mw. M. du Bois	  director MS Foundation, The Hague
   Dr. P.J.H.W. Jansen	  neurologist St. Anthonius Hospital, Sneek
   Ted de Braak 	  radio/TV presenter-entertainer, Lelystad
   Chriet Titulaer	  Wondere Wereld presenter, Houten
   Bert Haanstra	  filmmaker, Laren
   Thijs van Leer	  musician, Huizen
   Prof. O.R. Hommes	  neurologist, Nijmegen


§ 3. Installing TED

On the original TED diskette you will find the TED.COM program,
some helper programs and various text files from the Jos-Tel BBS.
You should copy this diskette directly to a blank diskette and
use the copy as your working disk. The original can then be
stored in a safe place.

TED is protected by means of a user name embedded in every sold
copy. Your user name is shown on screen every time you exit TED.
You may always make working copies for your own use. Of course
it is not allowed to distribute or copy TED for third parties.
Please respect the Multiple Sclerosis fund-raiser and support
the cause by not distributing copies!


§ 3.1  Preparing a working diskette

The MSXDOS system, which is protected by copyright, is not on
the original TED diskette, so you also need to copy the
MSXDOS.SYS and COMMAND.COM files to your working disk.

The best way is as follows:

1. Make sure you have a blank, formatted diskette ready, and
   start your computer with any MSXDOS diskette in the A: drive,
   for example the system diskette that came with your computer.
   If you have two disk drives, you can already place the blank
   diskette in the B: drive.

2. After the A> prompt of MSXDOS, type the following command:
   COPY  A:MSXDOS.SYS B:
   This copies the MSXDOS.SYS file from the system diskette to
   the (still empty) TED working disk. If you have only one disk
   drive, you will have to swap the diskettes when prompted.

3. In the same way, copy the COMMAND.COM file from your system
   diskette to the working disk with the command:
   COPY A:COMMAND.COM B:

4. Next put the original TED diskette in the A: drive and copy
   all files to the working disk with the command:
   COPY A:*.* B:


§ 3.2  Starting TED

You switch the computer on with the TED working diskette in the
A: drive. After a few seconds the A> prompt of MSX-DOS appears.
By now typing the command:

TED

and pressing Return, TED is loaded and started. It is also
possible to have TED automatically read a text file at startup,
for example the file `BRIEF.TXT'. To do this, type the following
after the A> prompt of MSX-DOS:

TED BRIEF.TXT

TED is then loaded and the text file with the name 'BRIEF.TXT'
is read into memory. You can of course choose any other
filename. If you don't supply a name extension, the default
extension that you can configure yourself is used.
Note: The extension is the part of the filename after the dot;
in this example the extension is therefore '.TXT'.

If MSX-DOS 2 is used, you can also specify which directory the
file should be loaded from.


§ 4. Screen layout

§ 4.1 Status lines

The lines that do not belong to the actual text are shown in
'inverse' (= the opposite colour). By default this colour is
green.

- Information line
  The top line of the screen (information line) shows the
following:

	- the state of the 'Insert' flag.
	- the current line and column number of the cursor
	- the current page. Page length can be set with command
	  F2/P/L.
	- The active function or control key. If no function is
	  active, it shows: "F7:Help".
	- an information ticker
	- a clock
	- Below the information line is the filename of the
	  current text. If MSX-DOS2 is used, the full search path
	  is shown, including any sub-directories.

- Command line
  The line below the information line is the command line. This
line shows the meanings of the function keys.

- Ruler
  The second-to-last line of the screen shows the boundaries of
the left and right margins, as well as the configurable tab
stops. The left margin is indicated with the letter 'L' and the
right margin with the letter 'R'. A tab stop is shown by the
'+' character. The arrow on the bottom line shows the column
position of the cursor.


§ 4.2 Text lines

The remaining lines have the 'normal' colour and contain the
text being edited. Text that is part of a block is shown in
inverse. At the right edge of each of these lines a 'status
character' is shown. This character is shown in inverse and
contains information about the corresponding text line.


The meanings of the status characters are:

space	Indicates that the line is not the end of the paragraph.
	This is the case when the last character of the line is a
	space. So you can add a line to a paragraph by placing a
	space at the end of that line.

<	Marks the end of a paragraph. Reflowing with the HOME key
	will therefore stop at this line.

+	This status character is shown when the line contains
	more characters than the screen can display.

1..5	These status characters are used to mark the last line of
	the column with the corresponding number.
P	Marks the last line of the last column of a page.


§ 5. The keyboard

§ 5.1 Letter keys

As with any word processor or typewriter, the letter keys
(A..Z 1..9 etc.) are used to type the text. When the right
margin is reached, the entire word is moved to the next line, so
you don't need to watch whether you have reached the end of the
line. The Return key is used to start a new paragraph.


§ 5.2 Other keys

In addition to the regular letter keys, there are a number of
keys with a special meaning.

The cursor (arrow) keys move the cursor (the cursor indicates
where the next character will be placed). When moving the
cursor, the text scrolls up, down, left or right as needed. The
cursor cannot be placed more than one position past the last
character of a line.


RETURN	Sends the cursor to the start of the next line. If the
	insert mode is ON, the underlying text moves down one
	line.

BS	Deletes the character to the left of the cursor.
DEL	Deletes the character under the cursor.
	SHIFT+DEL deletes the text to the right of the cursor.
	CTRL+DEL  deletes the current line.

INS	Toggles insert mode on or off. With this you decide
	whether a typed character should overwrite the current
	one, or whether the typed character should be inserted.

HOME	Reflows the paragraph the cursor is in, based on the
	current margin settings. Paragraphs are optionally also
	right-aligned (set via F2/A).
	If the hyphenation option is enabled with F2/A, you may
	in some cases be asked to hyphenate words. Words are only
	hyphenated when at least five letters of the word still
	fit on the previous line.
	The cursor is then placed on the relevant word and a
	help line appears at the bottom of the screen. You can
	then use the left/right cursor keys to move the cursor to
	the position where the word should be split, then press
	Return. If however the word cannot be hyphenated, press
	the spacebar; the entire word is then wrapped to the next
	line. If you want to abort reflowing the paragraph,
	because for example you made a mistake while hyphenating,
	press ESCape.

	N.B.: At the rightmost position of a line only spaces
	      can be placed, even if a word still seems to fit
	      entirely on the line. These spaces indicate that
	      the paragraph continues on the next line.

	On the input lines of the various menus, pressing the
	HOME key clears the entire current line. This works
	faster than clearing the line with the BS (back-space)
	key.

	CTRL+HOME:  Almost identical to HOME, but reflows the
		    paragraph from the cursor position onward,
		    leaving the text before the cursor untouched.
		    This function is particularly useful for
		    reflowing a paragraph with a sub-heading
		    before the left margin. A worked example of
		    this option can be found in § 8.1, reflowing
		    paragraphs.

	SHIFT+HOME: Almost identical to HOME, but indents the
		    first line of the paragraph. The number of
		    positions can be set with F2/A/I.

	GRAPH+HOME: Centers the current line based on the
		    current margin settings.

CTRL	When CTRL is pressed together with a left or right
	cursor key, the cursor moves to the start, or end, of
	the current line. Together with the up or down key, the
	cursor moves one screen height up or down (this is the
	same as function keys F6 and F1).
	Furthermore, by holding CTRL and then pressing one or
	two letter keys, you can perform the same options as
	those that can be triggered with function keys. You can
	configure these letter combinations with the program
	TEDINS6.BAS, see § 7.
	N.B.: The ^-character is often used to indicate the CTRL
	key.

SHIFT	Works as the regular shift key, but also has special
	functions:

	SHIFT+Right/Left arrow: Cursor one word to the right
	respectively left.

	SHIFT+Up/Down arrow: Cursor to the start of the previous
	or next printer page or column. The page length can be
	configured via F2/Print/Length. By default the text is
	printed in one column, so each column starts on a new
	page. The F3/koLom command can be used to change the
	number of columns per page.

TAB	Moves the cursor to the next tab stop. A tab stop is
	shown in the ruler at the bottom of the screen as a
	crossed mark. If insert mode is ON, spaces are inserted
	in the line; otherwise the cursor jumps over the text
	without inserting spaces.
	When the auto-indent function is ON (command F3/S/A),
	the function of the TAB key changes. The cursor stops
	not only at tab stops but also under the start of a word
	on the previous line. See also the description of the
	F3/S/A function.

	SHIFT+TAB: With this key combination you can enter text
		   in front of the current left margin. Text
		   entered after shift+tab is not automatically
		   transported from the first screen position to
		   the start of the left margin. This effect is
		   therefore only noticeable when the left margin
		   is at a column position greater than 1.

ESC	Has 2 meanings:
	1. Cancels a choice made via a function or control key.
	2. While typing text it produces an 'escape character',
	   which can be used to control the printer. This escape
	   character is shown on screen as an inverse letter 'e'.
	   N.B.: Look up the printer codes in your printer
	   manual!

SELECT	Produces the Control prefix character. The advanced user
	can use this to enter the ascii characters that are
	normally only used as control codes. These include the
	characters with ascii numbers 0..31, 127 (DEL) and 255
	(Cursor).

	The control prefix character is an inverse-displayed
	^-character. Directly after this control character you
	must enter a second character. When the text is saved to
	disk, the ascii number of this second character minus 64
	is taken.

	Example: the combination ^G stands for the ascii
		 character with value 7 (beep), because the
		 letter G has ascii number 71, and 71-64 is 7.

	Other useful characters are for example:

	^L: cls 		^[: escape, inverse 'e' character
	^\: cursor right	^]: cursor left
	^^: cursor up		^_: cursor down

	See the standard ASCII table for further details; it is
	in nearly every MSX manual.

STOP	With the STOP key the state of the cassette relay can be
	toggled. If a cassette recorder is connected to the
	cassette connector, the cassette motor can thus be
	switched on and off. This makes it easier, for example,
	to type out dictated text from cassette. Hobbyists can
	of course also switch all kinds of other things on and
	off via the cassette relay.


§ 6.  Description of the function-key commands

§ 6.1  Structure of the function keys

The meanings of the function keys are shown in the command line
at the top of the screen. After pressing one of the function
keys F2..F5, a 2nd command line appears. This sub-line shows the
options belonging to that function key, which you can select by
pressing a letter key (indicated with a capital letter). If you
want to return to the 'normal' command line without making a
choice, press ESC(ape). You can then continue where you left
off.

A complete description of each function key and the corresponding
options follows. A short summary list can be found in appendix A.


§ 6.2  Function keys F1 and F6: Down/Up

   Moves the cursor one screen height down, respectively up.


§ 6.3  Function key F2: Settings


F2/L and F2/R: Left/Right margin

   Set the left or right margin by entering a column number. If
   you enter nothing, the current cursor position is used.

   While typing the text is placed within the margins as much as
   possible. If however a particular paragraph has been changed
   with DEL and INS etc., you can press the HOME key to reflow
   the paragraph again.


F2/A: Paragraph (Alinea)

   With this you can set how the Home key reflows paragraphs.
   You have the following options:

   -U: Justify (Uitvullen)
       Right-justify paragraphs on/off.

   -A: Hyphenate (Afbreken)
       Hyphenation of words on/off.

   -S: Hyphenation mark (Streepje)
       Shape of the hyphenation mark.
       This mark is used to indicate that a word has been
       hyphenated. You have the choice between a long dash: '-'
       (Ascii nr. 45) and a short dash: '·' (Ascii nr. 250). It
       is recommended to use the short dash, because otherwise
       there can be confusion between a hyphenation mark and a
       hyphen connector. Take for example the following
       sentence (in Dutch):

       "De auto heeft een voor- en een achterruit"
       ("The car has a windshield and a rear window")

       While reflowing this sentence - via the "HOME" key - the
       hyphen after the word 'voor' must not be confused with a
       hyphenation mark. The words "voor-" and "en" would then
       be joined together, which is not the intent in this
       example.
       By using the shorter 'MSX-dash' as the hyphenation mark,
       this confusion is avoided. While printing - via the
       Printer Driver - the hyphenation mark "·" (Shift+Graph+C
       on the keyboard) is automatically replaced by a regular
       dash.

       For texts that need to be usable on computers without the
       MSX or IBM character set, the 'long' dash should always
       be used, since the short dash does not exist on other
       brands of computers. In that case you can of course also
       turn off hyphenation with the F2/A function.

   -I: Indent (Inspringen)
       Set the number of positions to indent at the start of a
       paragraph when reflowing with shift+home.


F2/Z and F2/W: Set/Clear tab stop

       Set or clear a tab stop at the position where the cursor
       is. In the ruler at the bottom of the screen the crossed
       line that indicates the tab stop appears or disappears.


F2/T: Tab settings

       With this you can specify whether runs of spaces may be
       stored as TAB characters (ascii no. 9). You have three
       options:

   -G: Use Tab characters in memory (Geheugen)
       If this option is enabled, more text fits in memory but
       the load and save functions are somewhat slower. The
       spaces are converted based on the tab stops set with
       F2/W and F2/Z.
       Toggling this setting clears the current text, so save
       to disk first!

   -B: Save Tab characters to disk (Bewaar)
       Using this option produces shorter disk files. The
       spaces are converted to TAB characters based on the
       configurable tab stops. If you load text that was saved
       with a different tab-stop setting, the text is adapted
       to the new setting. If you don't want this, turn this
       option off before saving the text.
       Also when text made with TED needs to be loaded into
       word processors that don't know TAB characters (e.g.
       Tasword and the Turbo Pascal editor), turn this option
       off.

   -L: Load Tab characters directly from disk (Laad)
       If this option is enabled, all tab characters are placed
       directly from disk into memory, and runs of spaces that
       could possibly also be represented by one or more tab
       characters are not converted to tab characters. This
       speeds up loading.

       If however the text is not optimally provided with tab
       characters (texts that have been entirely typed in TED
       are), less text fits in memory. It is therefore
       advisable to turn this option OFF when reading text
       files that were not created with TED. If you don't, the
       text will not be optimally provided with TAB characters
       during saving either, so the file will take more space
       on disk than necessary.

      Summary:
	- For the smallest possible text, use the setting
	  ON, ON, OFF
	- For the fastest possible loading/saving, use the
	  setting OFF, OFF, OFF
	- If you want both options, first save the text with
	  as many TABs as possible (setting ON, ON, OFF), then
	  switch the setting to ON, ON, ON and save this
	  setting with F2/B. The text will from then on be
	  loaded/saved quickly but the existing TAB characters
	  remain. When you add lines, those will also be
	  optimally provided with TAB characters.


F2/M: Memorymapper

   With this you can decide whether TED may use the Memory
   mapper and/or the Video RAM. This is especially important
   when a RAMdisk program is used under MSX-DOS1. After using
   this option, save the current settings to disk via
   F2/Save/Ted, so TED already knows during startup which part
   of memory may be used. Disabling for instance the memory
   mapper afterwards can have fatal consequences for an already
   present ramdisk.

   An exception is the printer-buffer program PB. TED detects
   the presence of this program directly after startup and
   makes sure no memory conflicts arise. Using PB.COM reduces
   the maximum available memory to 150 kilobytes.

   If the MemMan memory manager or the MSX-DOS2 operating
   system is used, TED automatically determines which part of
   memory is still free for use. Specifying whether or not TED
   may use the Memory Mapper(s!) therefore has no effect under
   DOS2 or MemMan; TED will ignore this setting.

   Changing the Memory Mapper and Video RAM settings clears
   the current text, so save to disk first!


F2/P: Printer

   With this you can specify how the text should be printed.
   You have several options, indicated on the screen by a
   capital letter. To change the header or footer line, however,
   choose a digit (1 or 2).

   You have the following options:

   -S: Setup String
       This string is sent to the printer every time printing
       starts. It usually consists of a few ESC codes, e.g.:
       ESC L006 (with this code your MSX printer is set to a
       left margin at column 6). With F2/D you can also assign
       special codes to certain characters, so that characters
       with ascii number lower than 32 can also be sent to the
       printer.

   -B: Top margin (Boven)
       Number of empty lines added at the top of each page.
       The header line can be placed at any desired position
       within the top margin.

   -O: Bottom margin (Onder)
       Number of empty lines added at the bottom of each page.
       The footer line can be placed at any desired position
       within the bottom margin.

   -L: Page length (Lengte)
       The number of lines per page that contains text. If the
       page length is set to zero, the text between the fixed
       page-stops is not divided into pages. Fixed page-stops
       can be placed in the text by means of the command
       F3/Page/Place page-stop.

   -1: Header line
       Text of up to 78 characters that is automatically placed
       above each page. If you want the page number printed in
       the header line, type $P at the desired place. While
       printing, the current page number will be placed there.

   -2: Footer line
       The same as the header line, except that it is placed at
       the bottom rather than the top of the page.

   -E: First page number
       The number of the first page printed.

   -P: Header line position
       Column number of the first character of the header line.

   -T: Footer line position
       Column number of the first character of the footer line.

   -R: Header line margin
       Indicates on which line within the top margin the header
       line is placed. If the header line margin falls outside
       the top margin, no header is printed.

   -G: Footer line margin
       Indicates on which line within the bottom margin the
       footer line is placed. If the footer line margin falls
       outside the bottom margin, no footer is printed.
       For example, if no page number needs to be printed at
       the bottom of each page, the footer line margin can be
       set to 0.

   -F: Formfeed
       If this option is ON, a formfeed character (ascii 12) is
       sent to the printer after every page. On most printers
       this advances the printer to the next page. If your
       printer doesn't have this capability, or you want to
       suppress page advancement or have it handled by the Top
       and Bottom margins, turn this option off.

   -C: Continuous printing
       If this option is OFF, printing pauses at the start of
       each new page. If you press a key, printing continues.
       If you press ESCape, printing is interrupted.
       If the option is ON, printing continues without pausing.

   -M: Mail-Merge
       If this option is on, while printing with F4/P or F5/P
       a data file is read in. The data from this file can
       then be inserted into the text while printing. The data
       can come from any database program, or even from a
       'plain' text file made with TED and optionally sorted.
       The text is reprinted until all cards from the data
       file have been processed.

   -N: Filename (Naam)
       Type here the name of the data file to be inserted by
       the Mail-Merge function. This name can also be selected
       with the command F3/Inhoud/Mail-merge.

   -I: Mail-merge marker
       Here you can enter the character you want to use to
       refer in the text to a field (line) from the database
       file. By default the dollar ($) character is used.
       Suppose you have entered an address file with TED. You
       have entered the name, street, postcode and city in
       sequence. The name is therefore in the first field, the
       address in the second and the postcode and city in the
       third.
       To now print the person's name, you must refer to the
       first field of the card and so type $(1). The
       parentheses around the field number are required. The
       highest possible field number is 99, the lowest is 1.

   -A: Card terminator
       Here you enter the characters, or Ascii numbers, that
       indicate the end of each card in the data file.
       TED can only distinguish between successive cards while
       inserting data when the end of each card is clearly
       indicated. If you enter a data file with TED, you have
       to put a special (arbitrary) marker between all cards
       yourself, for example a dash (-). For the card
       terminator you therefore enter the dash ("-") and the
       codes for a Return (13, 10).
       If however you want to insert cards from the EASE
       database program (.DBD files), you only enter the
       number 240 for the card terminator. Entering the
       characters works the same as for the printer driver
       (F2/D).

   -V: Field terminator
       Here you enter the characters or Ascii numbers that
       indicate the end of each field in the data file.
       If you enter a data file with TED, a 'field' is nothing
       more than a regular line, and regular lines are
       terminated with a Return. The end of a field is
       therefore indicated by the codes of a return (13, 10).
       If however you want to insert cards from the EASE
       database program (.DBD files), you only enter the
       number 0 for the field terminator. You can (of course)
       also insert cards from other database programs into the
       text, provided you know the correct end-of-card and
       end-of-field codes.

   -K: First card:
       Here you specify the number of the first card to be
       printed (inserted).

F2/D: Printer driver

   This is the so-called printer driver. With it, up to 32
   characters can be replaced by a series of up to nine other
   characters during printing. At the top of the screen an
   overview of the current printer-driver setting is shown. For
   each substituted character the corresponding replacement
   codes are listed.

   First you type the character you want to substitute. Then
   you can specify the corresponding codes. For example, if
   you want to assign the codes 27, "C", "I" and " " to the
   character @. On a Philips MSX printer this is the code to
   turn on italic printing. You first type the @ character,
   then press ESC (or just type the number 27) and press
   Return. Then you type the letter "C", optionally between
   quotes (but not required), and press return again. Continue
   like this until you have entered the last space. This last
   space is also not required, but it ensures the right margin
   stays smooth when the text is justified.

   You can remove a character from the printer driver by first
   typing the character, then erasing the 'old' code with the
   Back-Space key. If you then press Return, the character
   gets its own value back. To change the code of a previously
   entered character, you do this in the same way, except that
   you immediately type the replacement code after erasing the
   old one with the BS key.

   By pressing Return you can set the printer driver to be
   temporarily disabled, without having to give all characters
   their old value back. With ESCape you exit the printer
   driver.


F2/S: Sort settings

   With this you can configure how the F5/T command should sort
   a block.

   You have the following options:

   -K: Card length
       Here you can specify how many lines a card consists of.

   -A: Sort key 1
       Here you fill in the number of the field on which to
       sort. Then you fill in the column position of the field
       within the line.

   -B: Sort key 2
       If for two cards the contents of the first sort field
       are equal, the cards are subsorted by this second sort
       key.

   -C: Sort key 3
       This is the field on which to sort if for two cards the
       fields A and B are both equal.

   An example. You have entered an address list as follows:

Jos de Boer
Boppelâns 24
8721 GG Warns
-
Ries Vriend
Molenweg 45
1619 EV Andijk
-
Jan Janssen
Boppelâns 10
8721 ZZ Warns
-

   N.B.: As you can see, the cards are separated by a "-"
	 character; this lets the mail-merge function know
	 where each card ends (See F2/P/A).

   To now sort this list, first specify the length per card,
   in this case 4 lines (fields).

   Suppose you want the list sorted by city name, and when
   multiple persons live in the same city, you want the names
   in order per city.

   In the menu fill in via the "A" command the field number of
   the city name; in this example that is 3. For the column
   number, fill in 9, because the city name starts at position
   9, after the postcode.

   Then for "B" fill in field number 1, because the person's
   name is in the first field. For the column number you can
   simply fill in 1, because there is no other data before the
   name.

   For the third sort key fill in field number "0", via the
   "C" command. This indicates that you don't want a third
   sort pass.

   Then go back to the text with ESCape. Move the cursor to
   the 1st field of the 1st address (so somewhere on "Jos de
   Boer") and set the start of the block here (F5/S). Then
   set the end of the block in the last card by placing the
   cursor on "Boppelâns 10" and pressing F5/E.

   Then press F5/T and there you go: first comes Ries, then
   Jan, and finally Jos.

   N.B.: For sorting to work properly it is very important
	 that all cards span the same number of lines. First
	 a card with three fields and then a card with four
	 fields is guaranteed to fail. You can check whether
	 all cards have the same length by turning on the
	 page indication via F3/Page/Border and setting the
	 page length to the card length via F2/Page/Length.

	 The page indication thus obtained can act as a
	 card-length indicator. If the end of each card
	 corresponds with the page line on the right of the
	 screen, you know the cards have the right length.
	 You can also page through the cards by holding the
	 Shift key and pressing the cursor up or down key at
	 the same time.


F2/B: Save and load settings

   With this function you can store and reload your own
   preferred settings. All settings made with function keys F2
   and F3 are stored on diskette.

   You have the following options:

   -E: Save/Load settings with each text
       If this option is ON, an extra file is placed on
       diskette when each text is saved. This file gets the
       same filename as the text and the extension .TED. In
       this file the settings such as margins and header and
       footer lines are stored. When the text is loaded, this
       settings file is read again.

   -T: Store settings in TED
       With this you can store the current settings in
       TED.COM, so they are immediately active the next time
       TED starts. DOS2 users should make sure that the file
       TED.COM is in the current directory.

   -B: Save settings to a file
       With this you can save the current settings to a file.
       This file will automatically get the extension .TED.

   -L: Load a settings file
       With this function you can load a settings file from
       diskette. With this function the file will also
       automatically get the extension .TED, even if a
       different extension is specified. A settings file can
       also be loaded with the F3/I/S function.


§ 6.4  Function key F3 = System


F3/G: Memory (Geheugen)

   Shows the total and free amount of memory in kilobytes. With
   one 128 kB Memorymapper there is about 200 kB free (122 kB
   Video RAM and 80 kB RAM is used). Each text line costs four
   bytes plus the length of the line.

   If MSX-DOS2 is used, 32 kilobytes less memory is available.
   TED supports both internal memory and memory in external
   cartridges under MSX-DOS2 or MemMan.


F3/W: Wipe (Wis)

   With this you can clear the memory and/or the printer
   buffer. You have the following options:

   -T: Clear text (Tekst)
       Clears the entire text from memory.

   -P: Empty printer buffer
       Empties the printer buffer of the program PB. This
       option is especially useful when the paper has jammed
       or something similar and the buffer needs to be emptied
       quickly.
       Both the PB.TSR printer buffer for MemMan and the
       buffer of the program PB.COM can be used together with
       TED.


F3/I: Inhoud (Directory)

   Gives an overview of the files and free space on the
   diskette. You can select a drive by entering A: or B: as
   the selection. If no selection is given, TED assumes *.ext
   is meant, where .ext stands for the preferred extension set
   with F3/E.

   For an overview of all files type *.*.

   If MSX-DOS2 is used, sub-directories can also be included
   in the search path. For example, the search path

   B:\TED\BRIEF\*.*

   gives you an overview of all files and sub-directories of
   the directory \TED\BRIEF\ on disk B:.

   After Return is pressed, a cursor appears in the upper
   left, which you can control with the cursor keys to point
   to a file.

   At the bottom of the screen a help line appears with the
   following options:

   -L: Load
       Loads the file from disk. This option is the same as
       F4/L. With MSX-DOS2 you can also select sub-directories
       with this option. Sub-directories are distinguished
       from regular files in the file overview with the letter
       'd'. By selecting the special '..' sub-directory you
       can go up one sub-directory level.

   -B: Block
       Adds the file to the text. This option is the same as
       F5/L. The file is inserted at the current position of
       the cursor.

   -K: Character set:
       Loads the file as a character set (extension .SUP).
       This option is the same as F4/S/K. The character set
       will not be loaded if the standard MSX character set is
       ON (F3/S/M).

   -S: Settings
       Loads a settings file (extension .TED). This option is
       the same as F2/B/S.

   -M: Mail-Merge
       Marks the file as the data source for the mail-merge
       function. This option is the same as F2/P/N.

   -W: Wipe (Wis)
       Removes the file from the diskette.

   -I: Directory (Inhoud)
       With this option you can request a disk directory
       again.

   With ESCape you return to the text.


F3/L: koLom settings (column).

   You have the following options:

   -A: Number of columns (Aantal)
       With this you can specify how many columns are printed
       next to each other on the printer. These columns must
       be typed below each other, based on the page length.
       They can be laid out by enabling the page indication
       line via F3/Page/Border. If you hold the SHIFT key, you
       can quickly jump to the start of each column with the
       cursor up and down keys.

   -1..6: Position column 1 through 6
       The position of each column can be entered by pressing
       a digit between 1 and 6.

       Suppose you have set the number of columns to 2. The
       first column can then for example be set at position 5,
       and column 2 at position 45. The first column is then
       printed at 5 spaces from the left margin, and the
       second column at 45 spaces from the left margin. To
       prevent the columns from overlapping, the lines of the
       first column may, in this example, be at most 40
       characters long.

       It is also possible to enter 'title lines' that span
       across the columns. Such a title line just goes on the
       1st line of the 1st column. The 1st line of the
       adjacent column(s) must then be left empty, so no lines
       are printed over each other.


F3/P: Page (Pagina) layout

   You have the following options:

   -P: Place page-stop
       This command marks the current line as the last line of
       a page. When the text is printed - after the marked
       line is printed - the printer will continue on a new
       page.
       Up to two hundred page-stops can be placed in the text.

   -V: Remove page-stop (Verwijder)
       This command undoes a page-stop on the current line.

   -A: Remove all page-stops
       This option removes all page-stops from the text.

   -N: Page-number indication on/off
       This switch sets whether the current page number is
       shown in the status line at the top of the screen. If
       this option is turned off, moving the cursor will go a
       bit smoother. This is especially relevant when the text
       contains many page-stops.

   -S: Page-stop indication on/off
       With this switch the page-stop indication line can be
       turned on or off. If this option is on, the end of each
       line that contains a page-stop is marked with a dashed
       line. Also the status character `S' appears at the far
       right of the status bar. This character means:
       "Page-Stop".

   -G: Page-border indication on/off (Grens)
       This option turns the indication line - which marks the
       border between two pages - on or off. If this switch is
       on, the status character of every last line of a page
       becomes `P'. This character means: "Page-Border".
       The position of a page border depends on the configured
       page length. The page length can be changed with
       command F2/Print/Length.

       If a page contains more than one column (number of
       columns set with F3/koLom), the status character of the
       last line of each column changes to a digit between 1
       and 5. This digit corresponds with the column number.

       Based on these indicators the text can be laid out
       across various pages and columns.

       You can send the cursor to the start of a page or
       column by holding the SHIFT key and pressing the cursor
       up or down key at the same time.


F3/K: Colour (Kleur)

   Shows a colour overview on the screen. You can set four
   colours, namely the foreground and background colour of the
   text and the foreground and background colour of the cursor.
   The colours of the status lines are the same as those of
   the cursor. If the colour cursor is disabled (with F3/S/C),
   only the colours of the status lines are changed.

   Each colour consists of a mix from the palette blue, red
   and green. To each palette colour you can assign an
   intensity between 0 and 7 by pressing the corresponding
   value.

   With the cursor keys you can move the cursor to the colour
   to be changed.

   When you have set all colours, you can press ESC to return
   to the text. You can save the colour settings to diskette
   with F2/B.


F3/B: Backup

   This is the backup (reserve copy) menu. You have the
   following choices:

   -B: Make backup file
       If this option is ON, the previous version of a text is
       copied to a backup file when saving the text. The
       filename of this backup file remains unchanged; only
       the extension is changed to '.BAK'.

   -A: Make automatic backup
       If this option is ON, the text is automatically saved
       to disk after a certain number of keystrokes. If at the
       moment of saving no filename is yet known, TED will ask
       for one. If a filename is known, only an audio signal
       is sounded and you are asked to wait a moment.

   -S: Number of keystrokes (Slagen)
       With this choice you can set after how many keystrokes
       the text should be automatically saved; see also the
       paragraph above.


F3/E: preferred Extension

   The filename of files on a diskette consists of a name and
   an extension. The extension indicates what kind of file it
   is. With this option you can choose your own preferred
   extension.

   The cursor is placed after the previous extension; you can
   adjust it by pressing Back-Space (BS) or HOME, and then
   typing the new extension.

   The extension '.TXT' after a filename indicates that it is
   a text file. So normally this is the preferred one. If you
   don't want to use the configured preferred extension, you
   can of course just type an extension after the filename.


F3/S: Screen

   With this you can configure the screen. The following
   options are available:

   -C: Colour cursor
       Toggles between a coloured and inverse (regular) cursor.

   -B: Block cursor
       Toggles between a block-shaped and a line-shaped
       cursor. If this option is OFF, the cursor is line-
       shaped when the insert mode is ON.

   -S: Command line on screen
       Removes / shows the command line and the marker in the
       ruler. When this command line and ruler are removed,
       the text window grows by three lines.

   -V: Leading zero (Voorloop)
       Removes / shows an extra zero before the minutes and
       seconds in the clock. 7. 0: 0 thus becomes 7.00:00 or
       vice versa.

   -L: Information ticker (Lichtkrant)
       Toggles the ticker in the upper right of the status
       line on or off.

   -G: Large letters (Groot)
       Removes / shows large letters in the help menu that can
       be invoked with function key F7. This feature is
       specifically built in for the visually impaired.

   -R: Repeat keys (Repeteer)
       Toggles the keyboard repeat function on or off.

   -E: Edit mode
       Toggles edit mode on or off. Edit mode is especially
       suited for developing software. All spaces at the end
       of each line are automatically removed and all
       paragraph-reflow functions are disabled.

   -A: Auto Indent
       This option is usually used in combination with edit
       mode. If the auto indent - automatic indentation -
       option is on, the cursor jumps after a press on return
       to under the start of the line above.
       The function of the TAB key is changed by this option.
       Pressing TAB jumps to under the start of a word on the
       previous line. The current tab stops also retain their
       function. The auto-indent option is ideal for entering
       and editing Pascal, C and assembler programs.

   -I: Blinking cursor (knIpper)
       Toggles cursor blinking on or off.

   -N: Cursor on time (aaN)
       With this command the number of time units can be set
       during which the cursor is visible while blinking. One
       unit is one fiftieth of a second.

   -U: Cursor off time (Uit)
       With this option the number of time units can be set
       during which the cursor is invisible while blinking.

   -M: MSX character set
       Toggles between the standard MSX character set and a
       character set on disk. If the MSX character set is on,
       no character set can naturally be loaded from disk.

   -K: Character file
       With this option you can specify which character set
       should be loaded from disk. You can design character
       sets yourself with the program Superletter, written by
       Leon van Knijff. The character set will not be loaded
       if the standard MSX character set is ON (see paragraph
       above).


F3/H: Help menu

       With this you can change the text in the help menu that
       can be invoked with function key F7. You have the
       following options:

   -T: Menu to text (Tekst)
       Copies the eight lines from the help menu to the
       current line in the text so you can make changes to
       it. When the text is to your liking, you can use the
       M-option to copy the text back to the help menu.

   -M: Text to Menu
       Copies eight lines from the current line to the help
       menu.


§ 6.5  Function key F4 = Commands


F4/Z: Search (Zoek)

   Searches for a sequence of letters, and replaces it with
   another sequence. If you only want to search, leave the
   replacement text empty.

   Then with function keys F1 and F2 you can decide whether
   the search distinguishes between upper and lower case, and
   whether to search forward or backward. With function key F3
   you can set whether all found search texts may be replaced
   unconditionally or whether TED should ask for confirmation
   first.

   A press on Return starts the search. You can abort the
   search early by pressing ESCape.

   The search always starts from the position where the cursor
   currently is.

   The search and replace settings are kept. You can therefore
   reuse them later by pressing F4/Z again, or modify them.
   To enter a new search or replacement text, clear the old
   one by pressing the HOME key.


F4/N: Search again (Nog eens)

   Searches/replaces again with the same conditions specified
   under F4/Z.


F4/G: Go to (Ga naar)

   Goes to a particular position in the text. You have the
   following options:

   -T: To the top of the text
   -B: To the bottom of the text
   -S: To the start of a block
   -E: To the end of a block
   -R: To a line number (Regel)
   -0..9: To a line marked with F4/0..9


F4/P: Print

   Prints the text on the printer according to the settings
   chosen with F2/P and F2/D. You can abort printing early by
   pressing CTRL and STOP at the same time.

   At the top of the screen the line up to which printing has
   progressed, and the line up to which printing should go,
   are shown. If the mail-merge function is enabled with
   F2/P/M, it also shows which card is being read from disk
   and inserted into the text right now.

   If continuous printing is OFF (F2/P/C), printing pauses at
   the start of each page. Printing continues when you press
   a key.


F4/B: Save (Bewaar) the text

   Saves a text to disk under a name you specify. If you don't
   give an extension, TED assumes the preferred extension set
   with F3/E. E.g.: B:TEST becomes B:TEST.TXT

   If the file already has a name, for example because it was
   loaded from disk, TED shows this name and places the cursor
   after it. If you nevertheless want to give the file a
   different name, you can erase the old name with the Back-
   Space (BS) or HOME key, and then type a different name.


F4/L: Load a text

   Loads a text from disk with the same assumption as for
   F4/B. If the file is not found, the entered name is kept,
   so you can try again with another diskette.


F4/0..9: Mark a line

   Marks the current line in memory, with a number between 0
   and 9, so it can quickly be returned to with F4/G.


F4/S: Stop

   Stops TED and returns to MSX-Dos. Before stopping, the text
   can still be saved to disk.


§ 6.6  Function key F5 = Block functions


F5/S: mark Start position of the block

F5/E: mark End position of the block

   Marks the current position of the cursor as the end of the
   block. All characters belonging to the block are shown in
   inverse (= in the colour of the status lines).

F5/W: Wipes the block (removes the block from the text)

F5/D: Deletes the definitions of block start and block end

F5/K: Copies (Kopieert) the block to the current cursor position

F5/V: Moves (Verplaatst) the block to the current cursor position

F5/P: Prints the block on the printer

F5/T: Sort block (sorTeer)

   Sorts all cards in the block according to the settings
   chosen with F2/S. The block must start at the 1st field of
   the 1st card and end at the last field of the last card.

F5/L: Load block

   Inserts a text block from disk at the current cursor
   position.

F5/B: Saves (Bewaart) the block to disk (same assumption as F4/B)


§ 6.7  Function key 7 = Show help menu

   Shows / removes the help menu. The help menu can be changed
   by the user with command F3/H.


§ 7.  Control-key commands

§ 7.1  How they work

By holding the CTRL key and then pressing one or two letter
keys, you can execute the same commands as with the function
keys.


§ 7.2  Starting the TEDINS6 install program

With program TEDINS6.BAS you can choose yourself which key(s)
you want to use for each command.

To use the program TEDINS6.BAS, make sure both TED.COM and
TEDINS6.BAS are on the diskette in drive A:. To then start
TEDINS6, type from MSX-DOS:

A>BASIC TEDINS6.BAS

and from MSX-BASIC type

RUN"TEDINS6.BAS"


§ 7.3  Showing the current settings

With option 1 of the menu you can view which key(s) are used
for which command. If desired you can also have this overview
printed.

When you have just started TEDINS6, the key data is first read
from the program TED.COM.


§ 7.4  Setting key combinations

With option 2 of the menu you can select 1 or 2 letters for
each command. It is recommended to first print the current
settings with option 1, so you can see in advance (on paper)
which letter combination you want to use for each command.

Behind each command, in parentheses, the corresponding function
key and the current control-key combination are shown. You type
two letters (the desired control keys) behind each command. If
for a particular command you want to use only one letter, press
RETURN instead of the second character. If you don't want to
change the control-key combination, just press RETURN.

You may use each combination only once, and if you have already
entered a particular one-letter combination, you may not use a
two-letter combination for another command that begins with the
same character. If this is the case, you must choose a different
combination. If you have made a mistake, you can press ESCape to
start over.

N.B.: For setting the commands "Set and Clear marker" you only
      need to type one letter; the second letter is automatically
      the digit corresponding to the marker (0..9).


§ 7.5  Saving the key combinations

With option 3 you can save the configured control keys in the
program TED.COM, so your preferred keys are present from now on
directly after starting TED. It is recommended after using
option 3 to print the command list with option 1, so you have an
overview on paper.


§ 7.6  Quitting TEDINS6

With option 4 you exit the program TEDINS6.


§ 8.  Step-by-step examples

§ 8.1  Reflowing text into paragraphs

As mentioned earlier, '<' characters in the vertical status bar
on the right side of the screen indicate the end of each
paragraph. The paragraph layout arises because TED, while you
type, automatically wraps all words that no longer fit on a line
to the next line, and places a space at the end of each line.
If the last character of a line is not a space, because for
example Return was pressed, that line is recognized as the end
of the paragraph.

It is recommended to first enter a text (almost) completely,
and only afterwards lay it out neatly. This way you get a
better overview of the text because while reflowing afterwards
the coherence of the text can be re-examined and possibly
changed.

Some examples of laying out paragraphs afterwards follow.


   Joining two paragraphs into one

      - Move the cursor with the cursor keys to the end of the
	last line of the first paragraph. Add a space at that
	position by pressing the spacebar. The '<' character on
	the right side of the screen disappears and the
	paragraphs are joined. The new paragraph thus formed
	can be reflowed by pressing the HOME key.


   Splitting one paragraph into two separate paragraphs

      - Toggle insert mode ON with the INS key. Move the
	cursor to the position where the paragraph should be
	split, usually this will be the space directly after
	the end of a line. Press Return at that position to
	split the paragraph into two separate paragraphs. Both
	paragraphs can be reflowed with the HOME key.


   Reflowing paragraphs whose first line indents to the left

      - Set the desired left margin with the F2/L function.
	Move the cursor to the position before the left margin
	from where the indent should start. Then hold the CTRL
	key and press HOME.


   Placing numbering, bullet points, etc. before the left margin

      - To place a number or bullet - as in this paragraph -
	before the left margin of a paragraph, you can proceed
	as follows.
	If the desired character or number is not yet at the
	correct position before the margin, place it there by
	adding spaces with the spacebar and/or removing them
	with the BS and DEL keys. Then move the cursor to the
	first word of the paragraph and reflow the paragraph
	from that position by holding the CTRL key and then
	pressing HOME. The paragraph is then reflowed
	according to the configured margins, and the text to
	the left of the cursor remains untouched.


§ 8.2  Form letter with mail-merge

What follows is an example layout of a form letter and a
matching address list. First the address list is entered with
TED. The address list should be typed just like a normal text
and then saved to disk with the F4/B command. An address list
can be laid out for example like this:


M.S. BBS Jos-Tel
Boppelâns 24
8721 GG Warns
Nederland
-
Jos' Buurman
Boppelâns 25
8721 GH Warns
Friesland
-


As you can see, the cards are separated from each other by a
"-" character. You can also use other separator characters; see
the explanation of the F2/P function about the mail-merge
settings. Also if you use data from a separate database
program, you must configure this with the F2/P function.

After you have saved the data file with the F4/B command on
diskette, you can enter the form letter. A field (=line) from
a data card is referenced by $(xx), where xx stands for the
field number. The reference $(1) in the example letter below
therefore refers to the first field of the card, in this case
the company name.

The form letter could look like this:

From: Kees Bitbijter

To:  $(1)
     $(2)
     $(3)
	    $(4)

   Madam, Sir,

  By this I have the pleasure of offering you the latest price
list of diskettes.

Sincerely,

		Kees Bitbijter.


When you have entered your letter, you can turn the Mail-Merge
function ON with the F2/P/M option. Next, with the F2/P/N
function, enter the filename of the data file from which TED
should read the data. Finally, by giving the F4/P (Print)
command, the form letters are printed. The first form letter
from the example above will look as follows:


From: Kees Bitbijter

To:  M.S. BBS Jos-Tel
     Boppelâns 24
     8721 GG Warns
	    Nederland

   Madam, Sir,

  By this I have the pleasure of offering you the latest price
list of diskettes.

Sincerely,

		Kees Bitbijter.


You can also print address labels with the mail-merge function
of TED. To do this you can follow the same approach as for a
form letter; only the 'letter' is now much simpler, for
example like this:

$(1)
$(2)
$(3)
     $(4)

You can print the data file on labels by setting the length in
lines of each label with the F2/P/L function (usually 9).
Optionally you can adjust the position of the left margin by
varying the start position of column 1 with the F3/L (column)
function. The F4/P (Print) command is again used to start
printing.


§ 8.3  Lists

For entering lists, such as price lists, the configurable tab
stops can be very useful. These tab stops are shown in the
ruler at the bottom of the screen by a '+' character. By
pressing the TAB key you can move the cursor to the nearest
tab stop.

If the F2/T/G option is configured to keep TAB characters in
memory, the columns of the entered list are automatically
moved when tab stops are placed and cleared with the F2/Z and
F2/W options. If this automatic movement is not desired, turn
the F2/T/G option OFF. Note that the current text is wiped
when the F2/T/G option is toggled, so save the text to disk
first!

The first line of a list can be entered and laid out by moving
the cursor with the spacebar, TAB, DEL and BS keys to the
desired positions. After the first line is laid out as
desired, you can place a tab stop at any desired column
position with the F2/Z function. Unnecessary tab stops can be
cleared with the F2/W function.


§ 8.4  Text in columns

Below the layout of a text in two columns is discussed. It is
recommended to first type a text completely and only
afterwards lay it out into columns.

Suppose you want to print your text in 2 columns per page.
With the F3/L option the number of columns is set to 2. The
first column can then for example be set at position 5 and
column 2 at position 45. The first column is then printed at
5 spaces from the left margin, and the second column at 45
spaces from the left margin. To prevent the columns from
overlapping, the lines of the first column may, in this
example, be at most 40 characters long; this is achieved by
setting the right margin at position 40 with F2/R and then
reflowing the paragraphs (again) with the HOME key. A column
spans the full length of a page; the page length can be set
with F2/P/L. It is recommended to enable the page/column
indication line with the F3/Page/Border function while laying
out the text, so you can already see while laying out where
each new column and page begins.

When the text is finally to your liking, you can print it
with F4/P (Print).


§ 8.5  Pascal program

TED is extremely suited to entering and modifying programs in
Pascal and other languages. This so-called editing of programs
works best when you turn 'edit mode' on (option F3/S/E). All
unnecessary spaces at the end of each line are then
automatically removed and all paragraph-reflow functions are
disabled.

The auto-indent function (F3/S/A) can also be used while
entering Pascal programs, so the cursor automatically indents
after a press on return (see also the explanation under the
F3/S/A command).

If Turbo Pascal is used, the saving of TAB characters to disk
must be turned OFF (option F2/T/B), since Turbo Pascal cannot
process these codes correctly. The preferred extension can be
set to PAS with F3/E. The right margin must be set at position
131, this being the maximum line length that Turbo Pascal
allows.


§ 8.6  BASIC program

Also when entering BASIC programs, edit mode must be turned ON
with F3/S/E. The auto-indent function (F3/S/A) however must be
OFF, since BASIC lines may not be indented. The maximum line
length for BASIC programs is 254, so the right margin must
also be set at position 254 (with F2/R). The preferred
extension for BASIC programs is BAS or ASC (set with F3/E).
Finally, saving TAB characters to disk must be turned OFF
(option F2/T/B).

To be able to edit an existing BASIC program in TED, it must
have been saved to disk with the following BASIC command:

SAVE"PROGRAM.ASC",A

This command places the program with the name PROGRAM.ASC on
disk as ASCII text so that it can be read by TED. A program
saved to disk with TED can be loaded back with the LOAD
command of BASIC, for example:

LOAD"PROGRAM.ASC".

It is important that every program line of the BASIC program
is preceded by a line number. If you forget this, BASIC will
give the error "Direct statement in file" while loading.


§ 8.7  Assembler program

Assembler programs can become particularly unreadable if they
are not laid out neatly. The labels, mnemonics and the
comments are best entered in separate columns. An example:


		;**** Test program for TED *****

		;This program produces a beep tone after it is
		;assembled with e.g. GEN80 or M80.

wBoot		equ  00h
conOut		equ  02h
bel		equ  07h
bdos		equ  00005h

start:		ld   e,bel		;Put BEEP character in E
		ld   c,conOut		;Function: Output to screen
		call bdos		;Execute the command
		ld   c,wBoot		;Warm start
		jp   bdos		;Done

		end			;End of the program


To lay out programs in this way, you can proceed as follows.

Turn both edit mode and auto-indent mode ON (options F3/S/E
and F3/S/A). The right margin is set at position 131 (via
F2/R) and the left margin at position 1 (F2/L). Furthermore
TAB stops should be at positions 17, 22 and 41 (set with the
F2/Set-tab option), so that with the TAB key it is easy to
jump between columns. The tab stops that are normally at
positions 9, 25 and 33 can be removed (this saves memory and
disk space because the spaces between the mnemonics and the
comments are automatically replaced by a single TAB
character).

When auto-indent mode is turned ON, the cursor will
automatically indent to under the start of the previous line
after pressing return.

By means of the key combination Ctrl-Left you can quickly
jump to the start of the line: handy for quickly entering a
label.

Finally, insert mode must be ON, otherwise the line is not
extended up to the next TAB stop when pressing the TAB key.


§ 9.  The MemMan memory-management program

MemMan is a memory-management program developed by the MSX
Software Team. It is a 'Public Domain' program, which means
that it may be freely copied and distributed - in contrast to
TED.

When MemMan is loaded, it remains invisibly present for the
user. Other programs - such as TED - can then call it to
request working memory. MemMan will only allocate memory to TED
that is not yet in use by other programs such as printer
buffers or RAM disks. It is however necessary that those
programs have also requested their working memory from MemMan.

The program PB.TSR is specially written for use in cooperation
with MemMan, see § 10. Furthermore MemMan makes it possible for
TED to also recognize and use any external memory expansions in
the cartridge slots.


§ 9.1  Installing MemMan

By typing after the A> prompt of MSX-DOS

MEMMAN

MemMan will be installed. MemMan can also be installed by
typing after the "Ok" prompt of MSX-BASIC

BLOAD"MEMMAN.BIN",R

You can leave MSX-BASIC again by typing CALL SYSTEM, after
which the A> prompt of MSX-DOS reappears. Then type TED to
start TED. See also paragraph 3.2.

For more information about MemMan, read the manual that comes
with MemMan. This manual is called MM2INTRO.TXT and can be
loaded in TED with the F4/Load function.


§ 10.  The PB printer-buffer program

§ 10.1	Installing the printer buffer

The program PB.TSR is specially written for use in cooperation
with MemMan. It was published in MSX Computer Magazine number
46. This printer buffer can be used together with MemMan and
TED without any problems.

PB.TSR is a 'background' program that remains continuously in
memory after installation. All output sent by TED and other
programs to the printer is intercepted by PB and placed in a
memory buffer. As a result the computer is almost immediately
free for use after every print command, while the printing
from the printer buffer continues in the background. The
printer buffer is active under the MSX operating systems
MSX-DOS1, MSX-DOS2 and MSX-BASIC.

To be able to load PB, the memory-management program MemMan
must be active; § 9 describes how MemMan can be installed.

PB is installed by the program TL.COM. TL is started from
MSX-DOS; you can go from TED to MSX-DOS with the F4/S (stop)
command. After a few seconds the A> prompt of MSX-DOS appears.

By typing the command

TL PB

after the A> prompt and pressing Return, PB is loaded. TED can
then be started again; all text printed by TED is
automatically placed in the printer buffer.


§ 10.2 The PRINT.COM program

The program PRINT.COM makes the options of PB available under
the MSX-DOS operating system. Although PRINT is not specifically
applicable to TED, for completeness we give a brief description
of the available functions.

An important function of PRINT is the `dumping' of files into
the printer buffer. PRINT will load all files matching the
given filename and place them directly into the buffer memory.

The filename given to PRINT may contain the so-called
wild-cards - `*' and `?' - so that several files can be sent to
the buffer one after another. Under the MSX-DOS2 operating
system you can also specify in which sub-directory the files
are.

The other options of PRINT are accessible by means of the
so-called `switches'; commands of one letter preceded by a
`slash', i.e. the slash character `/'. PRINT is well-equipped
with these switches. By means of the option /C the buffer can
be emptied. Before the buffer is emptied, confirmation is
asked first. This question can be suppressed by specifying /D.
This option is handy when PRINT is started from a batch file -
the output is then not interrupted to ask for confirmation.

When /S is specified, the current size of the buffer is shown
on the screen. This size can be changed by means of /I followed
by a number that indicates the size. Thus the command

PRINT *.TXT /I16 /D

creates a buffer of 16 kB and no confirmation is asked. It is
therefore possible that the contents of the buffer are lost
without any notice. Then all files with the extension `.TXT'
are loaded into the buffer.

Via /V the version number of PB.TSR can be queried. When under
MSX-DOS2 /H is specified, the so-called `hidden' files can also
be printed. The last handy switch is /F; when this option is
specified, a formfeed character is added at the end of each
file, causing the last sheet of paper to be automatically
ejected from the printer after each file.


Appendix A - Summary of keyboard, function and control keys

Keyboard:

RETURN	     Starts a new paragraph
BS	     Deletes the character left of the cursor
DEL	     Deletes the character under the cursor
  SHIFT+DEL  deletes the text right of the cursor
  CTRL +DEL  deletes the current line
INS	     Toggles insert mode off or on
HOME	     Reflows the paragraph the cursor is in
  CTRL+HOME  Reflows the paragraph from the cursor position
  SHIFT+HOME Reflows paragraph and indents the first line
  GRAPH+HOME Centers the current line
CTRL+RIGHT   To the end of the line
CTRL+LEFT    To the start of the line
CTRL+UP      One screen height up
CTRL+DOWN    One screen height down
SHIFT+RIGHT  One word to the right
SHIFT+LEFT   One word to the left
SHIFT+UP     One page up
SHIFT+DOWN   One page down
GRAPH+LEFT   Toggles upper- and lowercase
GRAPH+RIGHT  Toggles upper- and lowercase
TAB	     Moves the cursor to the next tab stop
SHIFT+TAB    Enters text before the left margin
SELECT	     Produces the control prefix character
STOP	     Toggles the cassette motor on or off
ESC	     1. Leaves a choice menu  2. Produces escape character


Function and control keys:

F1 = One screen height down


F2 = Settings

F2/L	     Set left margin
F2/R	     Set right margin

F2/A/U	     Justify paragraph right on/off
F2/A/A	     Hyphenate words on/off
F2/A/S	     Shape of the hyphenation mark
F2/A/I	     Number of indent characters

F2/Z	     Set tab stop
F2/W	     Clear tab stop

F2/T/G	     Tab characters in memory on/off
F2/T/B	     Save tab characters to disk on/off
F2/T/L	     Load tab characters directly from disk on/off

F2/M/M	     Use Memorymapper on/off
F2/M/V	     Use Video RAM on/off

F2/P/S	     Printer Setup string
F2/P/B	     Top margin
F2/P/O	     Bottom margin
F2/P/L	     Page length
F2/P/1	     Header line
F2/P/2	     Footer line
F2/P/E	     First page number
F2/P/P	     Header line position
F2/P/T	     Footer line position
F2/P/R	     Header line margin
F2/P/G	     Footer line margin
F2/P/F	     Formfeed (page advance) on/off
F2/P/C	     Continuous printing on/off
F2/P/M	     Print with mail-merge on/off
F2/P/N	     Mail-Merge data file
F2/P/A	     Card terminator character(s)
F2/P/V	     Field terminator character(s)
F2/P/K	     First card from the mail-merge file
F2/P/I	     Mail Merge marker character

F2/D/Return  Printer driver on/off

F2/S/K	     Sort card length
F2/S/A..C    Sort fields

F2/B/E	     Save/load settings with each text
F2/B/T	     Save current settings in TED
F2/B/B	     Save current settings to a .TED file
F2/B/L	     Load settings from disk


F3 = System

F3/G	     Show memory space

F3/W/T	     Clear current text
F3/W/P	     Empty printer buffer

F3/I	     Disk directory

F3/L/A	     Number of text columns (1..6)
F3/L/1..6    Set column positions

F3/P/P	     Place a page-stop
F3/P/V	     Remove a page-stop
F3/P/A	     Remove all page-stops
F3/P/N	     Toggles page-number indication on/off
F3/P/S	     Toggles page-stop indication on/off
F3/P/G	     Toggles page-border indication on/off

F3/K	     Set screen colours

F3/B/B	     Make backup (=reserve) file on/off
F3/B/A	     Save automatically on/off
F3/B/S	     Number of keystrokes for autosave

F3/E	     Preferred filename extension

F3/S/C	     Coloured cursor on/off
F3/S/B	     Block cursor on/off
F3/S/S	     Command line on screen on/off
F3/S/V	     Leading zeros in clock on/off
F3/S/L	     Information ticker on/off
F3/S/G	     Large letters in help menu on/off
F3/S/E	     Edit mode on/off
F3/S/A	     Auto-Indent on/off
F3/S/R	     Repeat keys on/off
F3/S/M	     MSX character set on/off
F3/S/K	     Character-set file on disk
F3/S/I	     Cursor blinking on/off
F3/S/N	     Change cursor blink ON time
F3/S/U	     Change cursor blink OFF time

F3/H/T	     Copy help menu to text
F3/H/M	     Copy text to help menu


F4 = Commands

F4/Z	     Search/Replace
F4/N	     Search/Replace again

F4/G/T	     Go to top of the text
F4/G/B	     Go to bottom of the text
F4/G/R	     Go to line number
F4/G/S	     Go to start of block
F4/G/E	     Go to end of block
F4/G/0..9    Go to marker no. 0..9

F4/P	     Print the text

F4/B	     Save the text

F4/L	     Load a text

F4/0..9      Set a marker in the text

F4/S	     Quit TED


F5 = Block functions

F5/S	     Mark start position of the block
F5/E	     Mark end position of the block

F5/W	     Wipes the block (removes the block from the text)

F5/D	     Deletes the definitions of block start and block end

F5/K	     Copies the block to the current cursor position

F5/V	     Moves the block to the current cursor position

F5/P	     Prints the block on the printer

F5/T	     Sorts the block

F5/L	     Load block from disk

F5/B	     Save block to disk


F6 = One screen height up

F7 = Show/remove help menu


Appendix B - News in TED version 2.6

An option has been added to place fixed page borders in the
text; these fixed page borders are called `page-stops'.

For this the following commands have been added:

	F3/P/P - Place a page-stop
	F3/P/V - Remove a page-stop
	F3/P/A - Remove all page-stops
	F3/P/N - Toggles page-number indication on/off
	F3/P/S - Toggles page-stop indication on/off
	F3/P/G - Toggles page-border indication on/off

Jumping to the next or previous word in the text has been made
easier. The Shift/Left and Shift/Right key combinations have
been adapted. Special characters such as punctuation marks,
hyphens, dots and commas are now seen as separate words.

The Graph/Left and Graph/Right key combinations have been
added. With these, lowercase letters can be converted to
uppercase and vice versa.

While reflowing paragraphs (via the HOME key) the intermediate
phases are no longer shown on the screen. This produces a
calmer image and speeds up reflowing. In the upper left of the
screen the line number of the line currently being reflowed is
shown.

A similar improvement has been made to the block functions.
The various intermediate phases while copying and clearing
text blocks are no longer shown on the screen. The well-known
spinning and shaking effects while manipulating text blocks,
familiar to seasoned TED users, are now history.

While clearing blocks, the upper left of the screen shows how
many lines still need to be wiped. This is to soften the wait
for this relatively slow function.

If TED is started from a Kanji screen mode - under MSX-DOS2 or
on a Japanese MSX computer - it automatically switches to the
MSX standard text screen. After exiting TED the Kanji mode is
re-enabled.

The print-buffer program PB.TSR - which has been published by
MSX Computer Magazine - is supported by TED.


Ordering, information, etc.
---------------------------

TED is a product of:


      +------------------------------------------------------+
      | JOS-TEL M.S. BBS				     |
      | Tel.: 05149-1837				     |
      | Speeds:  300 1200/75 1200 and 2400 baud		     |
      | 						     |
      | Reachable Monday through Thursday from 21.00 to 7.30 |
      | 	   Friday through Saturday  from 20.00 to 12.00 |
      | 	   Sunday		    from 20.00 to 7.30  |
      +------------------------------------------------------+

TED version 2.6 can be ordered by transferring ƒ 50,= to:

MS BBS Jos-Tel
Boppelâns 24
8721 GG Warns
Giro: 2827142, in the name of Jos de Boer.

From this amount, ƒ 40,= is transferred directly to giro
account 6989 of the MS Foundation. Ten guilders is reserved
for postage, packaging and BBS expenses.

Updates can be obtained by sending the original TED diskette
(with sticker) and a valid means of payment - giro cheque or
postage stamps - to the address above. The required amount can
also be transferred to the giro account of Jos-Tel.

The update fees from versions 2.4 and 2.5 are ƒ 5,-; from
version 2.3 ƒ 10 and from earlier versions ƒ 15,-. Enclose a
self-addressed envelope with ƒ 1,50 of postage.

More information and a freely distributable demo version can
be obtained from the BBS Jos-Tel. The demo lacks the print and
save function.


Constructive criticism and donations gratefully received,

Sysop Jos-Tel:		Jos de Boer
			Boppelâns 24
			8721 GG Warns

Programmer:		Ries Vriend
			Andijk

			   *** End ***
